Every community needs a retirement home.  deprecated/ is ours.

This is where formats get moved once they become unused or are little used
and problematic to refit into newer infrastructure.  Formats are moved here
so they remain examples for future developers or so that they can be revived
by interested parties and updated in the future.  As I am writing this, the
formats being deleted are each under .02% (yes, the decimal is in the correct
place) of our expected users.

This allows us to modernize our core systems without getting bogged down
in reimplementing formats that nobody[1] has used in years.  It also allows
us to more easily bring back formats if we were wrong on how popular something
was.

Epitaths

* cetus, copilot, coto, gcdb, geoniche, gpilots, gpspilot, mag_pdb, magnav, 
  mapopolis, palmdoc, pathaway, pdbfile, quovadis: Palm/OS has been in decline
  for years.  We've seen no list traffic about these in years.  Many of them
  have particularly grubby internal implementations.  None of these programs
  have been updated since the demise of Palm/OS.
* hsa_ndv: Zero list traffic from anyone other than original author, 
  who has quit responding to email, contributed it ten years ago.
  Use of "raw" expat (which we're removing), strange structure, poor test
  suite coverage.  Company that created HSA is gone.
* coastexp: Extremely little use (three posts since submitted ten years ago,
  zero in the last five years)   Uses expat.  Probably easier to revive than
  hsa_ndv if there's interest.
* msroute: Long a problematic format when it was added in 2005.  It read
  Microsoft AutoRoute 2002 files.  It somewhat worked until about 2007 but
  pretty much every annual Microsoft update broke it.  As AutoRoute and 
  Streets & Trips has added GPX, this format has outlived its usefulness.
* psp: If desktop Microsoft S&T from 2002 was dead (see msroute) 
  PocketStreets 2002 Pushpin is even more dead.  Not used or made in years.
* axim_gpb: Dell Axim Navigation (their iPaq-wannabe) hasn't been used or
  made in years.  Usage stats are near zero.

R.I.P.

-- Robert Lipe

[1] That's in the purely mathematical sense, not a personal one.  We have
 millions of users...
